---
title: "How do varargs work in C?"
---

When I was taught C, functions had a fixed number of arguments. Here's an example:

```c
int sum_squares(int a, int b) {
  return a*a + b*b;
}
```

Function arguments are placed on the stack. So executing `sum_squares(2,3)` means placing `2` and `3` (amongst some other things) on the stack. Putting these two values on the stack means advancing the *stack pointer* enough for two `int` values, placing our two values in the free space.

How does something like `printf("Some values: %d, %s, %c!", 4, "foo", 'z')` fit into this scheme?

To my shame, I always assumed `printf` was implemented through macro magic. It's not! It's an ordinary function definition, and you can define it yourself. Here's its declaration:

```c
void my_printf(char* format, ...);
```

What is this `...`? It's a special token which *marks the function as variadic*, meaning that call sites can pass an arbitrary list of values following the named parameters.

The function definition follows the declaration syntax:

```c
void my_printf(char* format, ...)
{
  // ...
}
```

How do we access the extra arguments passed in the call? With three "special macros" in `stdarg.h`. First up is `va_start` (read: variable-arguments start):

```c
void my_printf(char* format, ...)
{
  va_list argp;
  va_start(argp, format);
  // ...
}
```

What is this `va_list`? It's effectively a pointer to an arguments in the var-args array. After calling `va_start`, `argp` points at the first var-argument.

The second macro is `va_arg`. You call it with a `va_list` and a _type_, and it takes value pointed at by the `va_list` as a value of the given type, then increment the pointer by the size of that pointer. For example, `va_arg(argp, int)` will return `(int) *argp`, and increment the pointer, so `argp += sizeof int`.

How do we know when we reach the end of the var-arguments array? Simple: we don't! Or rather, this API doesn't tell us, so we have to know in some other way. In the case of `printf`, it assumes there are at least as many var-arguments as there are format specifications (e.g. `%s`) in the format string.

At the point that we've stopped consuming arguments, we must call `va_end(argp)`. This does nothing in GNU C Lib, but the ISO C standard requires us to call it.

```c
#include <stdarg.h>

void my_printf(char* format, ...)
{
  va_list argp;
  va_start(argp, format);
  while (*format != '\0') {
    if (*format == '%') {
      format++;
      if (*format == '%') {
        putchar('%');
      } else if (*format == 'c') {
        char char_to_print = va_arg(argp, int);
        putchar(char_to_print);
      } else {
        fputs("Not implemented", stdout);
      }
    } else {
      putchar(*format);
    }
    format++;
  }
  va_end(argp);
}
```

Notice something odd: `char char_to_print = va_arg(argp, int)`. We use `int` as the type in the macro because types narrower than `int` are promoted to be of size `int`.
