---
title: 'Monthly review: 2017-03'
justification: 'Each month, I write a monthly review. It''s a look back and a look forward.'
tags: []
---

See [the previous monthly review](/2017/03/01/monthly-review-2017-02/).

My plan for March had the following three items: Complete paperlessness; Find a regular 17:00 activity; and Release Vidrio. Of these, I completed one: release Vidrio. I'm pretty happy with 1/3, because releasing Vidrio was the most important item on my list. I marked March out as "the month of Vidrio", and followed through with that.

In March, I tried out a new blogging mechanism: adding a "justification" property to each post. The intention was to prompt me to consider whether the day's effort is aligned with my general goals. I think the "justification" property was very successful in keeping me focussed. There were two common justifications in March: learning SSL (seven posts), and making Vidrio (36 posts!). Very few posts did not fall into these categories. I will certainly continue with the "justification" mechanism, and perhaps write a post about it.

What was I doing on Vidrio? First, figuring out Apple app development stuff: Apple Developer Program, iTunes Connect, "app records", privacy policy, app submissions, review process. Then  Figuring out Swift/Cocoa APIs: `NSApplicationMain`, XIB files, `NSApplication` (... this is a rabbit-hole). I worked on some Vidrio features: a menu bar icon, app icons, an opacity slider, pause/unpause, turning webcam on/off, monitoring screen resolution, fixing bugs, and some experiments with the touch bar (unmerged because the Touch Bar API does not allow us to register a new non-focussed application). The rest was Vidrio marketing: formulating a marketing strategy (I wish to rewrite this), creating [the Vidrio website](https://vidr.io), app description for App Store, "Made with Vidrio", creating [the Vidrio Slack team](https://vidrioapp.slack.com), and most recently creating [the Vidrio promo video](https://youtu.be/b0DP6UhlxeI). The work on Vidrio feels like primary an exercise in marketing. Probably less than 20% of my time on Vidrio has been spent coding.

In April, I'll be continuing work on Vidrio. I want to concentrate on getting people to pay for Vidrio, and tightening up the website to market Vidrio.

I also listed some technical things to learn in March: NAT, SSL, `lsof`, basic electronics, SCTP, assembly. I did none of these except SSL, where I have begun by walking through the `openssl` CLI tool. I'm removing some items from this list: electronics, SCTP, and assembly. I wish to continue focussing on UNIX and networking.

I tried various OpenSSL commands. `enc` does private-key encryption. `rand` generates random bytes. `s_client` connects to a TCP port running SSL. `passwd` does password hashing, but poorly. `dgst` produces message digests (and can sign messages with an HMAC). I then started looking at OpenSSL's public-key crypto tools, which are more interesting. I did key generation with `genrsa` and `rsa`. I did RSA encryption/decryption and signing/verification using `rsautl`. Next, I want to concentrate on OpenSSL's certificate facilities. I'd like to do this by creating my own (fake) CA.

Other technical things I would like to cover in April: OpenSSL, iptables, NAT, OAuth, payment systems.
