---
title: "Vidrio 1.1 is released"
justification: "I'm making Vidrio. Here's what's in v1.1."
---

Vidrio 1.1 was released on the Mac App Store today. Included is:

> Vidrio now has a pause/unpause feature! Vidrio is now more energy efficient! Vidrio is a pure menu bar app! And some all-new screenshots, explaining how to use Vidrio! And yes, Vidrio is still free, for a limited time only! Tell your friends!

One problem I had when submitting was:

> iTunes Store operation failed.
> This bundle is invalid. The value for key CFBundleVersion [1] in the Info.plist file must contain a higher version than that of the previously uploaded version [1].

There are no less than _three_ different version indicators for macOS apps:

* Key `CFBundleShortVersionString` in your `Info.plist`
* Key `CFBundleVersion` in your `Info.plist`
* The version string in iTunes Connect when submitting a new version

The first two correspond to the "Version" and "Build" strings in Xcode (under "Identity" in your target). The submission error was complaining about my "Build" string, which I had set to "1", as with the previous submission.

The distinction between the two is that `CFBundleShortVersionString` is a "public" version string that users see, whereas `CFBundleVersion` can change more frequently as you build things internally. If you don't need this complication, then set both to the same value.

It's unclear whether the version string in iTunes Connect must correspond with the version in your `Info.plist`.
